water is the softest and most yielding
substance
yet nothing is better than water for
overcoming the hard and rigid
because nothing can compete with it
lao tzu many people are hijacked by the
rigidity of their minds
thinking in categories and fixed ideas
can be a great crutch for survival
as it creates clarity in a chaotic
universe
but thinking too rigidly also has its
negative consequences
seeing the world in categories and
separate boxes limits our perception
so we become stuck in our ideas of how
things are
or supposed to be as the universe is
ever
changing and most things if not
everything
is more complex than our minds can
comprehend a more fruitful approach to
life
would be one that is flexible tangible
that enables us
to flow along you know a bit like
water the ancient chinese philosopher
lao tzu
celebrates flexibility in his timeless
work named
the dao de jing in which he opposes the
rigid life stance that
some people choose to take in contrast
to what many think
weakness or more specifically the
ability
and willingness to yield can actually be
a great strength
according to taoist philosophy hence
lautsu states that the supreme good is
like water this video explores the
benefits of being a bit
less rigid and a bit more like water
one thing that characterizes taoist
philosophy is a deference towards
nature the ways of nature are all
encompassing
the dance between opposites is the
fundamental principle
of how the universe works which
manifests
as ongoing change when we observe
nature closely and through a taoist lens
we can see
two forces at work yin and yang
or the feminine and the masculine
yang consists of the more active
elements of existence
like speed restlessness productivity
excitement aggressiveness being outgoing
but also hardness dryness and stiffness
yin consists of the more passive
elements like
silence receptiveness not reacting
as opposed to reacting and also softness
and flexibility our culture celebrates
the yang aspects of life it's all about
faster
bigger more better standing your ground
defending your unchanging opinions
confronting and clashing with
the enemy altering rather than adapting
yin aspects on the other hand are looked
down upon
for example being receptive to opposing
opinions
and being willing to change your views
is often seen as weak
if you stand for nothing you'll fall for
anything former american politician
alexander hamilton famously quoted which
may be true
but if we're not willing to maintain a
certain flexibility
never change our viewpoints on anything
never change our approach
and are never willing to bend with the
winds of life
we become as rigid as a dead branch
when we observe the nature of water
we'll discover that it's extremely
resilient to change
as water is able to take all kinds of
different forms
we can pour water in a glass and it
becomes the glass
when it's part of the ocean it waves
depending on the outside temperature
water changes its behavior
when it's cooked it evaporates when it's
frozen
it becomes solid thus water survives
many different circumstances by
adaptation
the softness of water adds strength to
living beings
because it makes them flexible and
therefore more resilient to
outside circumstances as lao tzu stated
the living are soft and yielding the
dead are rigid and stiff
living plants are flexible and tender
the dead are brittle
and dry end quote
things that are brittle and dry will
break easily and are either
dead or equivalent to being dead
the same goes for minds that are rigid
and stern
people that are rigid and stern
generally have difficulties
dealing with change as they desire
permanence rather
than the uncertainty of impermanence
unfortunately
for these people change is inevitable
life is impermanent if life would be
permanent
it would be lifeless thus when we don't
accept the reality of impermanence
we waste a lot of energy fighting the
inevitable
change in life comes in different forms
we could experience small changes for
example
a new colleague or we could experience
big changes
like moving to another country divorce
or even
death now if we would compare life to a
river
we could see its subtle twists and turns
as small changes
a drastic change in course would
represent a big change
and when it discharges in the ocean it
would be
death we see that the river flows along
with the changes of circumstances
adapting to different landscapes and
finding its way
past obstructions without effort even
its inevitable annihilation
the river approaches without being
troubled without resistance as it simply
merges
into something else and thus we live
life in a continuous flow finding our
ways around everything that crosses our
path
not resisting even the most drastic of
changes
including death but also when we'd be
contained
like water being kept in a jar we would
just be still
and be the jar until our circumstances
change
lauter argues in the dao de jing that
the soft overcomes the heart
he takes water as a metaphor for this
assertion
water is soft and flexible but also has
the power to erode the hardest materials
like rock and metal
i quote everyone knows that the soft and
yielding
overcomes the rigid and hard but few can
put this knowledge
into practice end quote so
to be like water we need to know how we
can overcome the heart
by being soft first of all taoism is a
philosophy about
not forcing anything in practice we can
see that
using force is not only exhausting it
often doesn't get us anywhere
now this doesn't mean that we should
never use force
in certain situations but in many cases
the soft approach
is superior to using force when it comes
to long-term
results as well as saving our energy and
maintaining a tranquil
mind this mechanism is best explained
through examples a great example of the
power of softness
we can find in a movie shawshank
redemption in which the protagonist
andy dufresne is sentenced to life in
shashank state penitentiary for
murdering his wife and her lover even
though he keeps saying that he didn't do
it
after 19 years of imprisonment he
escapes
and flees to mexico andy uses soft and
stealthy methods
to reach his goals probably because of
his background as a banker he is able to
think
long term and knows that small actions
in the present will eventually lead to
big changes in the future
he also loved geology which is as the
film puts it
a study of pressure and time by being
friendly and helpful
and using his intelligence he is able to
become a trustee
of the corrupt and heartless prison
warden samuel norton
and enjoys several privileges by sending
a letter to the state's senate
every week for 6 years he is able to get
funding for a prison library
eventually andy escapes through a tunnel
that he dug
using a small hammer which he hid in a
bible it takes him 19 years to dig that
tunnel
a project that he hides behind a poster
of a pinup girl
with his soft and patient approach he
did not only conquer a thick
concrete wall but also the prison's
authority
his escape however is explosive he
rushes into the tunnel
gets on the other side breaks a sewer
pipe crawls
through 500 yards of excretement cashes
in
exposes the warden to the media and
flees to mexico
thus he doesn't abstain from using force
completely
he just saves it for the right
opportunity that took him 19 years of
softness to create
to be like water means that we're able
to adapt to different circumstances
every situation has something positive
to it
in still water the dust can settle so it
becomes clear
streaming water passes different places
and sceneries and
nurtures the things that it encounters
in the yang society we live in
we only seem to value one part of human
existence which is
the active part that revolves around
achievement
speed and success we get educated
take on a lot of responsibility in
regards to work and family
try to get rich and do it as quickly as
possible and judge each other
as human doings rather than human beings
being useless or stupid or ugly or poor
is generally considered undesirable but
if we master the flexibility of finding
the positive in a negative
we'll realize that these undesired
characteristics have
positive aspects to them it's just a
matter of perception
for example being poor means less money
and possessions to worry about
and being ugly means that we're less
likely to end up
in a string of abusive relationships and
that people like us
for our personality instead of looks in
the taoist work
zhuangzu there is a story about a kruka
tree which was so deformed
compared to the stray trees that
lumberjacks labeled it useless
as it was unable to turn into usable
wooden planks
then zhuangzu came along and stated that
a tree is actually very suitable
as a place to relax because the tree was
seen as useless by the lumberjacks it
never got chopped down so it became old
and big
and people eventually turned it into a
holy site
so the longevity of the tree was due to
its
uselessness being useless may not lead
to a good reputation
and will probably evoke shaming and
blaming by our environment but it also
leads to less burdens
less pressure and probably a much more
relaxed
life every cloud has a silver lining
moreover water always seeks the lower
places
and makes the best out of circumstances
that no one wants to be in
life is characterized by softness and
softness is strength
soft things don't break easily because
they can bend and yield
unlike the brittle and rigid even the
hardest of
rock can be overcome by the gentleness
of water
and even the blowing of the wind hence a
famous actor
philosopher and martial artist once said
don't get set into one form adapt it and
build your own
and let it grow be like water
thank you for watching
[Music]
you